chore (doc):Create a files for "Building a generic plugin" and link "Files gatsby looks for in plugin"  closes #20527 (#21961)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/creating-a-generic-plugin.md

---
title: Creating a Generic plugin
---

> This section is aimed at explaining the structure of a gatsby plugin and the files that are needed to create it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is aimed at explaining the structure of a Gatsby plugin and the files that are needed to create it.
```

As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/),a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives your site additional functionality.

They contain a file, usually in the project root, called `package.json` - this file holds various metadata relevant to the project. This file is used to give information to npm that allows it to identify the project as well as handle the project's dependencies.

The process of initializing a `package.json` in a project is done by running :

```shell
  npm init
```

> After running the above command a series of options are listed in the CLI interface and the options are stored in your `package.json` which contain some [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running the above command a series of options are listed in the CLI interface and those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contain some [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin.md)
```

### What happens in a Generic Plugin ?

> In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/) which is where all the processes like createPage,createResolvers,sourceNodes exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/) such as `createPage`, `createResolvers`, and `sourceNodes`.
```

> In this file you are able to carry out functions that load API keys, send calls to APIs, create Gatsby-nodes using the API response, create pages to display responses, and loop through responses to display an individual response (a good use case of this would be a plugin that gets data from an API).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `gatsby-node.js` you are able to carry out functions that load API keys, send calls to APIs, create Gatsby-nodes using the API response, create pages to display responses, and loop through responses to display an individual response (a good use case of this would be a plugin that gets data from an API).
```
This is one sentence with a lot of different options. I'd recommend breaking this up and figuring out what we're trying to say here. Are we just listing options? Or trying to explain specific types of things one might use a plugin for?

Author: I was aiming to list out some of the operations that could be carried out in the `gatsby-node.js`. I will clarify

> An example of a source node would look like this:

Reviewer: Can we explain what a source node is and why it's relevant? Is there somewhere to link to with that context?

```JavaScript
export.sourceNodes = ({ actions,createNodeID,createContentDigest})=>{
  const nodeData = {
    title : "Test Node",
    description:"Testing the node "
  }
  const newNode = {
    ...nodeData,
    id: createNodeId("TestNode-testid")
    internal :{
      type: "TestNode"
      contentDigest: createContentDigest(nodeData),
    },
  }
  actions.creatNode(newNode)
}
```

> Restarting the server will make the `allTestNode` query available at `localhost:8000/___graphql`

Reviewer: allTestNode query? I assume that's a test for nodes of type TestNode but we need to be more explicit. What does that query look like and why is it relevant?

> Libraries like [Axios](https://www.npmjs.com/package/axios) can be used to handle calls in the `gatsby-node.js` file

> As seen in the [naming a plugin](/docs/naming-a-plugin/) section, the function of the plugin is shown in the naming format. However, they all have the same structure.

Reviewer: This feels like an abrupt ending. Can we do some kind of wrap up?

---
title: Creating a Generic plugin
---

> This section is aimed at explaining the structure of a Gatsby plugin and the files that are needed to create it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is aimed at explaining the structure of a Gatsby plugin and the files you need to create one.
```
I think this centers it on the reader a bit more.

> As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/),a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives your site additional functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/), a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives your site additional functionality.
```

> As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/), a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives your site additional functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/), a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives a Gatsby site additional functionality.
```

> They contain a file, usually in the project root, called `package.json` - this file holds various metadata relevant to the project. This file is used to give information to npm that allows it to identify the project as well as handle the project's dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins contain a file, usually in the project root, called `package.json` - this file holds various metadata relevant to the project. The `package.json` file is also used to provide information to npm that identifies the project and allows npm to handle the project's dependencies.
```

> The process of initializing a `package.json` in a project is done by running :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of initializing a `package.json` in a project is done by running:
```

> The process of initializing a `package.json` in a project is done by running :

Reviewer: There should probably be a heading here. Maybe ## Initializing your plugin project

Author: I agree.

> The process of initializing a `package.json` in a project is done by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to initialize a `package.json` for your project, run the following command:
```

  npm init
```

> After running the above command a series of options are listed in the CLI interface and those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contain some [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/what-you-dont-need-plugins-for/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running the above command a series of options are listed in the command line interface (CLI). Those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contains some of the [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/what-you-dont-need-plugins-for/)
```

Reviewer: Is this the right link? I suspect you're trying to link to the section @gillkyle recently published?

Author: I fixed that. I was trying to link to /docs/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin

Reviewer: Have you pushed those changes? I saw the request for review and reviewed what was in the latest commit.

Author: Just pushed them

> ### What happens in a Generic Plugin ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What happens in a Generic Plugin?
```

> After running the above command a series of options are listed in the command line interface (CLI). Those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contains some of the [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've run the command you'll see a series of options listed in the command line interface (CLI). Those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contains some of the [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin)
```

## What happens in a Generic Plugin?

> In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/) such as `createPage`, `createResolvers`, and `sourceNodes`. A Node is the smallest unit of data in Gatsby. Nodes are created using the [createNode](/docs/actions/#createNode) action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/). These APIs, such as `createPage`, `createResolvers`, and `sourceNodes`, manipulate the Node(s) in a Gatsby site. A Node is the smallest unit of data in Gatsby. You can create a Nodes using the [createNode](/docs/actions/#createNode) action.
```
Can we expand on what a Node is? Or link to something that does? I think that's relevant for why someone would want to manipulate one.

Author: Gotcha! I just added a link to a better explanation

> In `gatsby-node.js` you are able to carry out functions with APIs such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `gatsby-node.js` you can carry out functions with these APIs, such as:
```

- Sending calls to APIs
- Creating Gatsby-nodes using the API response
- Creating Individual pages from nodes

> A good use case of the above would be a plugin that gets data from an API.

> [sourceNodes](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) is a life-cycle API that a plugin can use to create Nodes. A Node is the smallest unit of data in Gatsby. Nodes are created using the [createNode](/docs/actions/#createNode) action.

Reviewer: Perhaps it makes sense to talk about what a node is higher up, in the "In a generic plugin" paragraph. Then the `sourceNodes` piece is an example.

Author: Yea I get what you mean.

> An example of how a sourceNode would be implemented is shown below :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of how a sourceNode would be implemented is shown below:
```

> ```JavaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript:title=gatsby-node.js
```

> [sourceNodes](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) is a life-cycle API that a plugin can use to create Nodes. An example of how sourceNodes would be implemented is shown below:

Reviewer: Perhaps a header about this being an example of a generic plugin? And should we make it a full example and put it in the repo?

> [sourceNodes](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) is a life-cycle API that a plugin can use to create Nodes. An example of how sourceNodes would be implemented is shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[sourceNodes](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) is a life-cycle API that a plugin can use to create Nodes. An example of how to implement a function using `sourceNodes` is shown below:
```

export.sourceNodes = ({ actions,createNodeID,createContentDigest})=>{
  const nodeData = {
    title : "Test Node",
    description:"Testing the node "
  }
  const newNode = {
    ...nodeData,
    id: createNodeId("TestNode-testid")
    internal :{
      type: "TestNode"
      contentDigest: createContentDigest(nodeData),
    },
  }
  actions.creatNode(newNode)
}
```

> The above code block creates a node called "Test Node " as seen from the `title` parameter. If this process is successful restarting the server will make the `allTestNode` query available at `localhost:8000/___graphql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above code block creates a node called "Test Node" as seen from the `title` parameter. If this process is successful restarting the server will make the `allTestNode` query available at `localhost:8000/___graphql`.
```

> The above code block creates a node called "Test Node" as seen from the `title` parameter. If this process is successful restarting the server will make the `allTestNode` query available at `localhost:8000/___graphql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above code block creates a node called `"Test Node"` as seen from the `title` parameter. If this process is successful, restarting the server will make the `allTestNode` query available at `localhost:8000/___graphql`.
```

---

> title: Creating a Generic plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Creating a Generic Plugin
```

---

This section aims to explain the structure of a Gatsby plugin and the files you need to create one.

> The idea of a generic plugin is to lay more emphasis on the makeup of a Plugin rather than the specific labels( source,transformer, local) that are [selected based on functionality](docs/naming-a-plugin/). As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/), a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives a Gatsby site additional functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea of a generic plugin is to lay more emphasis on the makeup of a plugin rather than the specific labels ( [source](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/), [transformer](/docs/creating-a-transformer-plugin/), [local](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-a-local-plugin/)) that are [selected based on functionality](/docs/naming-a-plugin/). As seen in the [what is a plugin doc](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/), a plugin is a piece of software that acts as an add-on and gives a Gatsby site additional functionality.
```

Plugins contain a file, usually in the project root, called `package.json` - this file holds various metadata relevant to the project. The `package.json` file is also used to provide information to npm that identifies the project and allows npm to handle the project's dependencies.

## Initializing your plugin project

To initialize a `package.json` for your project, run the following command:

```shell
  npm init
```

Once you've run the command you'll see a series of options listed in the command-line interface (CLI). Those you select are stored in your `package.json` which contains some of the [files Gatsby looks for in a Plugin](/docs/files-gatsby-looks-for-in-a-plugin)

> ## What happens in a Generic Plugin?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What happens in a generic plugin?
```

> In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/). These APIs, such as `createPage`, `createResolvers`, and `sourceNodes`, manipulate the Node(s) in a Gatsby site. A [Node](/docs/node-creation/) is the smallest unit of data in Gatsby. You can create a Nodes using the [createNode](/docs/actions/#createNode) action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a generic plugin the `gatsby-node.js` file enables the use of [gatsby node APIs](/docs/node-apis/). These APIs, such as `createPage`, `createResolvers`, and `sourceNodes`, manipulate the Node(s) in a Gatsby site. A [Node](/docs/node-creation/) is the smallest unit of data in Gatsby. You can create a Node using the [createNode](/docs/actions/#createNode) action.
```

> IIn `gatsby-node.js` you can carry out functions with these APIs, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `gatsby-node.js` you can carry out functions with these APIs, such as:
```
